Cleric
-----

The Cleric Base Class
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*Alignment:* A cleric’s alignment must be within one step of his deity’s (that
is, it may be one step away on either the lawful–chaotic axis or the
good–evil axis, but not both). A cleric may not be neutral unless his
deity’s alignment is also neutral.

*Hit Die:* d8.

Class Skills
^^^^^^^^^^^^
*The cleric’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are:*
Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Diplomacy (Cha), Heal (Wis), Knowledge
(arcana) (Int), Knowledge (history) (Int), Knowledge (religion) (Int),
Knowledge (the planes) (Int), Profession (Wis), and Spellcraft (Int). 

*Domains and Class Skills:* A cleric who chooses the Animal or Plant domain
adds Knowledge (nature) (Int) to the cleric class skills listed above. A
cleric who chooses the Knowledge domain adds all Knowledge (Int) skills to
the list. A cleric who chooses the Travel domain adds Survival (Wis) to the
list. A cleric who chooses the Trickery domain adds Bluff (Cha), Disguise
(Cha), and Hide (Dex) to the list. See Deity, Domains, and Domain Spells,
below, for more information.

*Skill Points at 1st Level:* (2 + Int modifier) x4.

*Skill Points at Each Additional Level:* 2 + Int modifier.

include::../tables/cleric.txt[]

Class Features
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

All of the following are class features of the cleric.

*Weapon and Armor Proficiency:* Clerics are proficient with all simple
weapons, with all types of armor (light, medium, and heavy), and with
shields (except tower shields).

A cleric who chooses the War domain receives the Weapon Focus feat related
to his deity’s weapon as a bonus feat. He also receives the appropriate
Martial Weapon Proficiency feat as a bonus feat, if the weapon falls into
that category.

*Aura (Ex):* A cleric of a chaotic, evil, good, or lawful deity has a
particularly powerful aura corresponding to the deity’s alignment (see the
detect evil spell for details). Clerics who don’t worship a specific deity
but choose the Chaotic, Evil, Good, or Lawful domain have a similarly
powerful aura of the corresponding alignment.

*Spells:* A cleric casts divine spells, which are drawn from the cleric spell
list. However, his alignment may restrict him from casting certain spells
opposed to his moral or ethical beliefs; see Chaotic, Evil, Good, and Lawful
Spells, below. A cleric must choose and prepare his spells in advance (see
below).

To prepare or cast a spell, a cleric must have a Wisdom score equal to at
least 10 + the spell level. The Difficulty Class for a saving throw against
a cleric’s spell is 10 + the spell level + the cleric’s Wisdom modifier.
Like other spellcasters, a cleric can cast only a certain number of spells
of each spell level per day. His base daily spell allotment is given on
Table: The Cleric. In addition, he receives bonus spells per day if he has a
high Wisdom score. A cleric also gets one domain spell of each spell level
he can cast, starting at 1st level. When a cleric prepares a spell in a
domain spell slot, it must come from one of his two domains (see Deities,
Domains, and Domain Spells, below).

Clerics meditate or pray for their spells. Each cleric must choose a time at
which he must spend 1 hour each day in quiet contemplation or supplication
to regain his daily allotment of spells. Time spent resting has no effect on
whether a cleric can prepare spells. A cleric may prepare and cast any spell
on the cleric spell list, provided that he can cast spells of that level,
but he must choose which spells to prepare during his daily meditation.
Deity, Domains, and Domain Spells: A cleric’s deity influences his
alignment, what magic he can perform, his values, and how others see him. A
cleric chooses two domains from among those belonging to his deity. A cleric
can select an alignment domain (Chaos, Evil, Good, or Law) only if his
alignment matches that domain.

If a cleric is not devoted to a particular deity, he still selects two
domains to represent his spiritual inclinations and abilities. The
restriction on alignment domains still applies.

Each domain gives the cleric access to a domain spell at each spell level he
can cast, from 1st on up, as well as a granted power. The cleric gets the
granted powers of both the domains selected.

With access to two domain spells at a given spell level, a cleric prepares
one or the other each day in his domain spell slot. If a domain spell is not
on the cleric spell list, a cleric can prepare it only in his domain spell
slot.

*Spontaneous Casting:* A good cleric (or a neutral cleric of a good deity) can
channel stored spell energy into healing spells that the cleric did not
prepare ahead of time. The cleric can “lose” any prepared spell that is not
a domain spell in order to cast any cure spell of the same spell level or
lower (a cure spell is any spell with “cure” in its name). 
An evil cleric (or a neutral cleric of an evil deity), can’t convert
prepared spells to cure spells but can convert them to inflict spells (an
inflict spell is one with “inflict” in its name).

A cleric who is neither good nor evil and whose deity is neither good nor
evil can convert spells to either cure spells or inflict spells (player’s
choice). Once the player makes this choice, it cannot be reversed. This
choice also determines whether the cleric turns or commands undead (see
below).

Chaotic, Evil, Good, and Lawful Spells: A cleric can’t cast spells of an
alignment opposed to his own or his deity’s (if he has one). Spells
associated with particular alignments are indicated by the chaos, evil,
good, and law descriptors in their spell descriptions.

*Turn or Rebuke Undead (Su):* Any cleric, regardless of alignment, has the
power to affect undead creatures by channeling the power of his faith
through his holy (or unholy) symbol (see Turn or Rebuke Undead).

A good cleric (or a neutral cleric who worships a good deity) can turn or
destroy undead creatures. An evil cleric (or a neutral cleric who worships
an evil deity) instead rebukes or commands such creatures. A neutral cleric
of a neutral deity must choose whether his turning ability functions as that
of a good cleric or an evil cleric. Once this choice is made, it cannot be
reversed. This decision also determines whether the cleric can cast
spontaneous cure or inflict spells (see above).

A cleric may attempt to turn undead a number of times per day equal to 3 +
his Charisma modifier. A cleric with 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (religion)
gets a +2 bonus on turning checks against undead.

*Bonus Languages:* A cleric’s bonus language options include Celestial,
Abyssal, and Infernal (the languages of good, chaotic evil, and lawful evil
outsiders, respectively). These choices are in addition to the bonus
languages available to the character because of his race.

Ex-Clerics
^^^^^^^^^^
A cleric who grossly violates the code of conduct required by his god loses
all spells and class features, except for armor and shield proficiencies and
proficiency with simple weapons. He cannot thereafter gain levels as a
cleric of that god until he atones (see the atonement spell description).
